.TH pass-env 1 "2026 March 15" "Version 0.1.2" "User Commands"

.SH NAME
pass-env \- a password-store extension to manage environment variables from encrypted .env entries

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pass env
.I SUBCOMMAND
[
.I ENTRY ...
] [
.B \-\-
.I COMMAND ...
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pass-env
is an extension for
.BR pass (1)
that lets you store
.I KEY=VALUE
environment variable files as encrypted entries in the password store and
load, unload, or run commands with those variables in a single step.

Entries must end in
.B .env
(e.g.\&
.IR os/prod.env ,
.IR api/openai.env ).
Each entry contains one
.I KEY=VALUE
pair per line; blank lines and lines starting with
.B #
are ignored.

A companion shell function,
.BR passenv ,
is provided in
.I contrib/pass-env-init.sh
for sourcing into
.BR bash (1)
or
.BR zsh (1)
sessions. It wraps the pass extension and maintains a session tracker so that
loaded entries can be unloaded cleanly.

.SH PASS EXTENSION SUBCOMMANDS

.TP
.B pass env list
Print all
.I .env
entries available in the password store, one per line (no
.I .gpg
suffix), sorted alphabetically.

.TP
.BI "pass env run " "ENTRY [ENTRY ...]" " \-\- " "COMMAND [ARGS...]"
Decrypt one or more entries and execute
.I COMMAND
with the resulting variables set in its environment.  Nothing is written to
disk and no variable leaks into the calling shell.  This is the safest way to
pass secrets to a subprocess.
.PP
.RS
.EX
pass env run os/prod.env \-\- printenv MY_VAR
pass env run api/openai.env db/prod.env \-\- myapp
.EE
.RE

.TP
.BI "pass env set " "ENTRY [ENTRY ...]"
Decrypt one or more entries and print
.B export
.I KEY=VALUE
statements to stdout.  Eval the output to load variables into the current
shell.  If
.I ENTRY
is omitted and
.BR fzf (1)
is installed, an interactive picker is launched (TAB to multi-select).
.PP
.RS
.EX
eval "$(pass env set os/prod.env)"
eval "$(pass env set os/prod.env api/openai.env)"
.EE
.RE

.TP
.BI "pass env unset " "ENTRY [ENTRY ...]"
Decrypt one or more entries and print an
.B unset
statement listing all their variable names to stdout.  Eval the output to
remove the variables from the current shell.  If
.I ENTRY
is omitted and
.BR fzf (1)
is installed, an interactive picker is launched.
.PP
.RS
.EX
eval "$(pass env unset os/prod.env)"
.EE
.RE

.TP
.BR "pass env version"
Print the installed version of pass-env.

.TP
.BR "pass env help"
Print usage information for the extension.

.SH PASSENV SHELL FUNCTION

Source
.I contrib/pass-env-init.sh
in your
.I ~/.bashrc
or
.I ~/.zshrc
to enable the
.B passenv
shell function:

.RS
.EX
source /path/to/pass-env/contrib/pass-env-init.sh
.EE
.RE

The shell function wraps the pass extension, evaluates export/unset output
directly into the calling shell, and tracks loaded entries in the session
variable
.B _PASSENV_TRACKER
so that they can be unloaded by name.

.TP
.BI "passenv set " "[ENTRY ...]"
Load one or more entries into the current shell.  If no
.I ENTRY
is given, launches an interactive
.BR fzf (1)
picker.
.PP
.RS
.EX
passenv set os/prod.env
passenv set os/prod.env api/openai.env
.EE
.RE

.TP
.BI "passenv unset " "[ENTRY ...]"
Unset the variables loaded from each named entry and remove it from the
tracker.  If no
.I ENTRY
is given, launches an interactive
.BR fzf (1)
picker over currently loaded entries.

.TP
.BI "passenv run " "[ENTRY ...]" " \-\- " "COMMAND [ARGS...]"
Decrypt one or more entries and execute
.I COMMAND
with their variables set in its environment only.
Nothing leaks into the current shell.
This is a convenience wrapper around
.B pass env run
for users who have sourced the shell function.
If no
.I ENTRY
is given before
.BR \-\- ,
an interactive
.BR fzf (1)
picker is launched.
.PP
.RS
.EX
passenv run os/prod.env \-\- printenv MY_VAR
passenv run api/openai.env db/prod.env \-\- myapp
.EE
.RE

.TP
.B passenv version
Print the installed version of pass-env.

.TP
.B passenv list
List all
.I .env
entries available in the password store (delegates to
.BR "pass env list" ).

.TP
.B passenv loaded
Print a table of all entries currently loaded in this shell session and
their associated variable names.

.TP
.B passenv help
Print usage information for the shell function.

.SH ENTRY FORMAT

Each entry is a plain-text file (encrypted with GPG by pass) containing one
.I KEY=VALUE
pair per line.
.PP
.EX
# Example entry: api/openai.env
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-abc123
OPENAI_ORG=org-xyz
.EE
.PP
Rules:
.IP \(bu 4
Blank lines are ignored.
.IP \(bu 4
Lines beginning with
.B #
are treated as comments and ignored.
.IP \(bu 4
Key names must match
.B ^[A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*$
.IP \(bu 4
Entry filenames must end in
.B .env
(the
.I .gpg
suffix is added by pass automatically).

.SH ENVIRONMENT

.TP
.B PASSWORD_STORE_DIR
Root directory of the password store.  Defaults to
.IR ~/.password-store .

.TP
.B PASS_CMD
The
.BR pass (1)
executable to invoke.  Defaults to
.BR pass .

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pass (1),
.BR gpg (1),
.BR fzf (1)

.SH AUTHOR
Thomas Laurenson

.SH HOME
.I https://github.com/thomaslaurenson/pass-env

.SH REPORTING BUGS
.I https://github.com/thomaslaurenson/pass-env/issues

.SH LICENSE
Copyright \(co 2026 Thomas Laurenson.
.PP
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.PP
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.PP
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.
